doc: migration guide for Ansible and quickstart fixes (#3571)
operator-framework/operator-sdk: website/content/en/docs/building-operators/ansible/migration.md

---
title: Migrating Legacy Projects
linkTitle: Migrating Legacy Projects
weight: 3
---

This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple memcached-operator which was built by following the [legacy quick-start][quickstart-legacy] to the new layout.

## Overview

The motivations for the new layout are related to bringing more flexibility to users and 
part of the process to [Integrating Kubebuilder and Operator SDK][integration-doc].

### What was changed
 
The `deploy` directory was replaced with the `config` directory including a new layout of Kubernetes manifests files

> - CRD's manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CRD manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`
```

Author: It needs to be in the plural.

> - CR's manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CR manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`
```

Author: It needs to be in the plural.

- Controller manifest `deploy/operator.yaml` was replaced for `config/manager/manager.yaml` 

> - RBCA's manifests in `deploy` are in `config/rbac/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- RBAC manifests in `deploy` are in `config/rbac/`
```

The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the files properly and then, 
just replace with your customizations and implementations. Following an example. 
 
### Creating a new project

In Kubebuilder-style projects, CRD groups are defined using two different flags
(`--group` and `--domain`).

When we initialize a new project, we need to specify the domain that _all_ APIs in
our project will share, so before creating the new project, we need to determine which
domain we're using for the APIs in our existing project.

To determine the domain, look at the `spec.group` field in your CRDs in the
`deploy/crds` directory.

The domain is everything after the first DNS segment. Using `cache.example.com` as an
example, the `--domain` would be `example.com`.

So let's create a new project with the same domain (`example.com`):

```sh
$ mkdir memcached-operator
$ cd memcached-operator
$ operator-sdk init --plugins=ansible --domain=example.com
```

Now that we have our new project initialized, we need to re-create each of our APIs. 
Using our API example from earlier (`cache.example.com`), we'll use `cache` for the
`--group` flag.

> For each API in the existing project which is using a role, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each API in the existing project which is using an Ansible role, run:
```
Its a little redundant, but IMO its better to be explicit than a user confuse this with an RBAC role.

```sh
$ operator-sdk create api \
    --group=cache \
    --api-version=<apiVersion> \
    --kind=<Kind> 
```

**Note** Ensure that you use the same values for the flags to recreate the same Helm Chart and API's. If you have

> more than one chart or API's you can add them via `operator-sdk create api` command. For further information check the [quick-start][quickstart].

Reviewer: Copy paste error (s/Helm/Ansible/), but I think this is already covered, maybe remove this note but leave a link.

 
### Replacing the content

- Update the CR manifests in `config/samples` with the values of the CR's in your old project which are in `deploy/crds/`
- Check if you have customizations options in the `watch.yaml` file of your previous project and then, update the new `watch.yaml` file with the same ones
- Ensure that all roles configured in the `/deploy/roles.yaml` will be applied in the new project in the file `config/rbac/role.yaml`
- If you are using `molecule` in your project then, ensure that you move all your code to the `molecule` directory in your new project. Note that this directory was not changed at all.

## Exporting metrics 

If you are using metrics and would like to keep them exported you will need to configure 
it in the `config/default/kustomization.yaml`. Please see the [metrics][metrics] doc to know how you can perform this setup. 

The default port used by the metric endpoint binds to was changed from `:8383` to `:8080`. To continue using port `8383`, specify `--metrics-addr=:8383` when you start the operator. 

### Checking the changes

> Now, follow the steps in the section [Build and run the operator][build-run-quick] to verify your project is running. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, follow the steps in the section [Build and run the operator][build-run-quick] to verify your project is running. 
```

[quickstart-legacy]: https://v0-19-x.sdk.operatorframework.io/docs/ansible/quickstart/

> [quickstart]: /docs/building-operators/helm/quickstart

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[quickstart]: /docs/building-operators/ansible/quickstart
```

---
title: Migrating Legacy Projects
linkTitle: Migrating Projects to 1.0.0+
weight: 6
description: Instructions for migrating a Ansible-based project built prior to 1.0.0 to use the new Kubebuilder-style layout.
---

## Overview

The motivations for the new layout are related to bringing more flexibility to users and 
part of the process to [Integrating Kubebuilder and Operator SDK][integration-doc].

### What was changed
 
- The `deploy` directory was replaced with the `config` directory including a new layout of Kubernetes manifests files:
    * CRD manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`
    * CR manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`
    * Controller manifest `deploy/operator.yaml` is now in `config/manager/manager.yaml` 
    * RBAC manifests in `deploy` are now in `config/rbac/`
    
- `build/Dockerfile` is moved to `Dockerfile` in the project root directory

> - The `molecue/` directory is now more aligned to Ansible and the new Layout

Reviewer 2: this should be molecule.

### What is new

Scaffolded projects now use:

- [kustomize][kustomize] to manage Kubernetes resources needed to deploy your operator
- A `Makefile` with helpful targets for build, test, and deployment, and to give you flexibility to tailor things to your project's needs
- Updated metrics configuration using [kube-auth-proxy][kube-auth-proxy], a `--metrics-addr` flag, and [kustomize][kustomize]-based deployment of a Kubernetes `Service` and prometheus operator `ServiceMonitor`

## How to migrate

> The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the new layout. Then, add your customizations and implementations. See below for an example.

Reviewer 2: project from scratch

Author: done

- version: v1alpha1
  group: cache.example.com
  kind: Memcached
  role: memcached 
# +kubebuilder:scaffold:watch
```

**NOTE**: Do not remove the `+kubebuilder:scaffold:watch` [marker][marker]. It allows the tool to update the watches file when new APIs are created. 

### Migrating your Molecule tests

If you are using [Molecule][molecule] in your project will be required to port the tests for the new layout.  

See that default structure changed from:

```sh
├── cluster
│   ├── converge.yml
│   ├── create.yml
│   ├── destroy.yml
│   ├── molecule.yml
│   ├── prepare.yml
│   └── verify.yml
├── default
│   ├── converge.yml
│   ├── molecule.yml
│   ├── prepare.yml
│   └── verify.yml
├── templates
│   └── operator.yaml.j2
└── test-local
    ├── converge.yml
    ├── molecule.yml
    ├── prepare.yml
    └── verify.yml

```

To: 

```
├── default
│   ├── converge.yml
│   ├── create.yml
│   ├── destroy.yml
│   ├── kustomize.yml
│   ├── molecule.yml
│   ├── prepare.yml
│   ├── tasks
│   │   └── foo_test.yml
│   └── verify.yml
└── kind
    ├── converge.yml
    ├── create.yml
    ├── destroy.yml
    └── molecule.yml
```

And now:

> - Use the var `${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}` instead of `${MOLECULE_EPHEMERAL_DIRECTORY}`

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what these are referring to, I don't think they should change their usage of these variables

Author: I will remove this since we have a following up for the molecule. 
We need to check it. 
PS.:  when we scaffold the values now this are the values which appear now. So, would possible to have the old one as well?

> - Use the var `${KUBECONFIG:-"~/.kube/config"}` instead of `${MOLECULE_EPHEMERAL_DIRECTORY}/kubeconfig` to get the kubeconfig

Reviewer 3: This is only true for the `default` scenario (which runs against an existing cluster), the `kind` scenario still uses the ephemeral kubeconfig

Author: I will remove this since we have a following up for the molecule. 
We need to check it. 
PS.:  when we scaffold the values now this are the values which appear now. So, would possible to have the old one as well?

Also, ensure that the `provisioner.host_vars.localhost` has the following `host_vars`: 

```
....
    host_vars:
      localhost:
        ansible_python_interpreter: '{{ ansible_playbook_python }}'
        config_dir: ${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}/config
        samples_dir: ${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}/config/samples
        operator_image: ${OPERATOR_IMAGE:-""}

>         pull_policy: ${OPERATOR_PULL_POLICY:-"Always"}

Author: ```suggestion
        operator_pull_policy ${OPERATOR_PULL_POLICY:-"Always"}
```

>         operator_pull_policy ${OPERATOR_PULL_POLICY:-"Always"}

Author: ```suggestion
        operator_pull_policy: ${OPERATOR_PULL_POLICY:-"Always"}
```

The following rules were used in earlier versions of anisible-operator to automatically create and manage services and `servicemonitors` for metrics collection. If your operator's don't require these rules, they can safely be left out of the new `config/rbac/role.yaml` file:

```yaml  
  - apiGroups:
    - monitoring.coreos.com
    resources:
    - servicemonitors
    verbs:
    - get
    - create
  - apiGroups:
    - apps
    resourceNames:
    - memcached-operator
    resources:
    - deployments/finalizers
    verbs:
    - update
```

### Configuring your Operator

If your existing project has customizations in `deploy/operator.yaml`, they need to be ported to 
`config/manager/manager.yaml`. If you are passing custom arguments in your deployment, make sure to also update `config/default/auth_proxy_patch.yaml`.

Note that the following environment variables are no longer used. 

- `OPERATOR_NAME` is deprecated. It is used to define the name for a leader election config map. Operator authors should begin using `--leader-election-id` instead.

> - `POD_NAME` was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Ansible operator used the leader for life mechanism. Ansible operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism, and `POD_NAME` is no longer necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `POD_NAME` has been removed. It was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Ansible operator used the leader for life mechanism. Ansible operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism.
```

If your existing project has customizations in `deploy/operator.yaml`, they need to be ported to 
`config/manager/manager.yaml`. If you are passing custom arguments in your deployment, make sure to also update `config/default/auth_proxy_patch.yaml`.

Note that the following environment variables are no longer used. 

- `OPERATOR_NAME` is deprecated. It is used to define the name for a leader election config map. Operator authors should begin using `--leader-election-id` instead.
- `POD_NAME` was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Helm operator used the leader for life mechanism. Helm operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism, and `POD_NAME` is no longer necessary.

### Exporting metrics 

If you are using metrics and would like to keep them exported you will need to configure 
it in the `config/default/kustomization.yaml`. Please see the [metrics][metrics] doc to know how you can perform this setup. 

The default port used by the metric endpoint binds to was changed from `:8383` to `:8080`. To continue using port `8383`, specify `--metrics-addr=:8383` when you start the operator. 

## Enabling Ansible Logs

> If you would like to enable the Ansible Logs to check yur project update the `config/manager/manager.yaml` with the environment variable `ANSIBLE_DEBUG_LOGS` as `True`:

Reviewer 4: Typo (yur project)

Author: solved

> ---

Reviewer: This doc is very important at the moment because we have just made the change. However, I think a better place for this long term is the reference section

title: Migrating Legacy Projects

> linkTitle: Migrating Legacy Projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: Migrating Projects to 1.0.0+
```
"Legacy" is a moving target. Here we mean migrating to 1.0, but when 1.1 comes out, this could be misleading.

Author: @joelanford suggested we have not the 1.0.0 in another pr. I prefer we have the version as well. Let's see if he is ok @joelanford wdyt?

Reviewer 5: Yeah this seems reasonable :+1:

weight: 7

> description: This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple memcached-operator which was built by following the [legacy quick-start][quickstart-legacy] to the new Kubebuilder-style layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple memcached-operator which was built prior to 1.0.0  by following the [legacy quick-start][quickstart-legacy] to the new Kubebuilder-style layout.
```

---

## Overview

The motivations for the new layout are related to bringing more flexibility to users and 
part of the process to [Integrating Kubebuilder and Operator SDK][integration-doc].

### What was changed
 
The `deploy` directory was replaced with the `config` directory including a new layout of Kubernetes manifests files

> - CRD manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`

Reviewer: For this section, please apply the same suggestions as helm. https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk/pull/3595#pullrequestreview-458361167

- CR manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`
- Controller manifest `deploy/operator.yaml` was replaced for `config/manager/manager.yaml` 
- RBAC manifests in `deploy` are in `config/rbac/`

The `build/Dockerfile` directory was replaced by the `Dockerfile` in the root directory
The structure of `molecue/` directory is now more aligned to Ansible and the new Layout

### What is new

> Projects are now scaffold using:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scaffolded projects now use:
```

- [kustomize][kustomize] to manage Kubernetes resources needed to deploy your operator
- A `Makefile` with helpful targets for build, test, and deployment, and to give you flexibility to tailor things to your project's needs
- Updated metrics configuration using [kube-auth-proxy][kube-auth-proxy], a `--metrics-addr` flag, and [kustomize][kustomize]-based deployment of a Kubernetes `Service` and prometheus operator `ServiceMonitor`

## How to migrate

> The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the files properly and then, 
> just replace with your customizations and implementations. Following an example. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easy migration path is to create a new project from the scratch and let the tool scaffold the new layout. Then, add your customizations and implementations. See below for an example.
```

 
### Creating a new project

In Kubebuilder-style projects, CRD groups are defined using two different flags
(`--group` and `--domain`).

When we initialize a new project, we need to specify the domain that _all_ APIs in
our project will share, so before creating the new project, we need to determine which
domain we're using for the APIs in our existing project.

To determine the domain, look at the `spec.group` field in your CRDs in the
`deploy/crds` directory.

The domain is everything after the first DNS segment. Using `cache.example.com` as an
example, the `--domain` would be `example.com`.

So let's create a new project with the same domain (`example.com`):

```sh
mkdir memcached-operator
cd memcached-operator
operator-sdk init --plugins=ansible --domain=example.com
```

> Now that we have our new project initialized, we need to re-create each of our APIs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have our new project initialized, we need to recreate each of our APIs. 
```

Using our API example from earlier (`cache.example.com`), we'll use `cache` for the
`--group` flag.

For `--version` and `--kind`, we use `spec.versions[0].name` and `spec.names.kind`, respectively.

For each API in the existing project, run:

```sh
operator-sdk create api \
    --group=cache \
    --version=<apiVersion> \
    --kind=<Kind> 
```

> After run the above command we will check that the `roles/` directory was created for the Kind but it is empty. So, we will copy the content of the `roles/` directory of our old project to the new one.   

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the above command creates an empty roles/<kind>`. We can copy over the content of our old `roles/<kind>` to the new one.   
```

The following rules were used in earlier versions of anisible-operator to automatically create and manage services and `servicemonitors` for metrics collection. If your operator's don't require these rules, they can safely be left out of the new `config/rbac/role.yaml` file:

```yaml  
  - apiGroups:
    - monitoring.coreos.com
    resources:
    - servicemonitors
    verbs:
    - get
    - create
  - apiGroups:
    - apps
    resourceNames:
    - memcached-operator
    resources:
    - deployments/finalizers
    verbs:
    - update
```

### Configuring your Operator

If your existing project has customizations in `deploy/operator.yaml`, they need to be ported to 
`config/manager/manager.yaml`. If you are passing custom arguments in your deployment, make sure to also update `config/default/auth_proxy_patch.yaml`.

Note that the following environment variables are no longer used. 

- `OPERATOR_NAME` is deprecated. It is used to define the name for a leader election config map. Operator authors should begin using `--leader-election-id` instead.

> - `POD_NAME` was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Helm operator used the leader for life mechanism. Helm operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism, and `POD_NAME` is no longer necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `POD_NAME` was used to enable a particular pod to hold the leader election lock when the Ansible operator used the leader for life mechanism. Ansible operator now uses controller-runtime's leader with lease mechanism, and `POD_NAME` is no longer necessary.
```

## Exporting metrics 

If you are using metrics and would like to keep them exported you will need to configure 
it in the `config/default/kustomization.yaml`. Please see the [metrics][metrics] doc to know how you can perform this setup. 

The default port used by the metric endpoint binds to was changed from `:8383` to `:8080`. To continue using port `8383`, specify `--metrics-addr=:8383` when you start the operator. 

> ## Enabling Ansible Logs

Reviewer: This isn't enabling Ansible logs, it is changing the log level to extremely verbose. I don't think this is necessary for migration.

---
title: Migrating Legacy Projects
linkTitle: Migrating Legacy Projects
weight: 7
description: Instructions for migrating a legacy Ansible-based project to use the new Kubebuilder-style layout.
---

This guide walks through an example of migrating a simple memcached-operator which was built by following the [legacy quick-start][quickstart-legacy] to the new layout.

## Overview

The motivations for the new layout are related to bringing more flexibility to users and 
part of the process to [Integrating Kubebuilder and Operator SDK][integration-doc].

### What was changed
 
The `deploy` directory was replaced with the `config` directory including a new layout of Kubernetes manifests files
- CRD manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/crd/bases`
- CR manifests in `deploy/crds/` are now in `config/samples`
- Controller manifest `deploy/operator.yaml` was replaced for `config/manager/manager.yaml` 
- RBAC manifests in `deploy` are in `config/rbac/`

> 

Author: ```suggestion
- Molecule layout to better aligned with Ansible and is good practices
```

After run the above command we will check that the `roles/` directory was created for the Kind but it is empty. So, we will copy the content of the `roles/` directory of our old project to the new one.   
 
## Migrating your CR's

Update the CR manifests in `config/samples` with the values of the CR's in your old project which are in `deploy/crds/`. In our example 
the `config/samples/cache_v1alpha1_memcached.yaml` will look like:

```yaml
apiVersion: cache.example.com/v1alpha1
kind: Memcached
metadata:
  name: memcached-sample
spec:
  # Add fields here
  size: 3
```

## Migrating your Watches

Update the `watches.yaml` file with your `roles/playbooks` as its customizations from your previous project. In our example it will look like:

Replace:
```yaml
---
# Use the 'create api' subcommand to add watches to this file.
- version: v1alpha1
  group: cache.example.com
  kind: Memcached
  # FIXME: Specify the role or playbook for this resource.
# +kubebuilder:scaffold:watch
```
With:

```yaml
---
# Use the 'create api' subcommand to add watches to this file.
- version: v1alpha1
  group: cache.example.com
  kind: Memcached
  role: memcached
# +kubebuilder:scaffold:watch
```

> **NOTE**: Do not remobe the [Maker][marker] `+kubebuilder:scaffold:watch`it allows the tool upddate the watches file when new API's are created. 

Author: ```suggestion
**NOTE**: Do not remove the [Maker][marker] `+kubebuilder:scaffold:watch`it allows the tool upddate the watches file when new API's are created. 
```

│   └── verify.yml
├── templates
│   └── operator.yaml.j2
└── test-local
    ├── converge.yml
    ├── molecule.yml
    ├── prepare.yml
    └── verify.yml
```

Now, it will be like: 
```
 $ tree
.
├── default
│   ├── converge.yml
│   ├── create.yml
│   ├── destroy.yml
│   ├── kustomize.yml
│   ├── molecule.yml
│   ├── prepare.yml
│   ├── tasks
│   │   └── memcached_test.yml
│   └── verify.yml
└── kind
    ├── converge.yml
    ├── create.yml
    ├── destroy.yml
    └── molecule.yml
```

- Replace the var `${MOLECULE_EPHEMERAL_DIRECTORY}` with `${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}`
- Use now `${KUBECONFIG:-"~/.kube/config"}` to get the kubeconfig instead of `${MOLECULE_EPHEMERAL_DIRECTORY}/kubeconfig`
- Ensure that the `provisioner.host_vars.localhost` has the following `host_vars`: 

```
....
    host_vars:
      localhost:
        ansible_python_interpreter: '{{ ansible_playbook_python }}'
        config_dir: ${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}/config
        samples_dir: ${MOLECULE_PROJECT_DIRECTORY}/config/samples
        operator_image: ${OPERATOR_IMAGE:-""}
        operator_pull_policy: ${OPERATOR_PULL_POLICY:-"Always"}
        kustomize: ${KUSTOMIZE_PATH:-kustomize}
...
```

> 

Author: Hi @fabianvf @asmacdo

Feel free to check the doc. I might need a help with the molecule section because it changed a lot.
However, I am trying to figure out it. See the sample migrated too in the pr: https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-sdk-samples/pull/138/files
